# QCLib

The aim of this library is to provide a framework for reasoning about quantum
gates and quantum circuits. *It is very much in an "alpha" stage of development*.


## Quick tour

* `QCLib/Mathlib`

This directory contains results that are of sufficient generality that they
might be of interest to Mathlib. There is no implication that the results are
already sufficiently polished to be upstreamed.

* `QCLib/Mathlib/PiOuterProduct.lean`
  `QCLib/Mathlib/UnitaryGroup/PiOuterProduct.lean`

The files define tensor products of indexed families of concrete vectors (i.e.
functions into a `CommMonoid`) and of (unitary) matrices. Most of the rest of the library
builds on these definitions.

* `QCLib/Mathlib/UnitaryGroup/Lemmas.lean` 
  `QCLib/Matrix/UnitaryGroup`

Quantum gate / circuits are modelled as unitary matrices. In addition to general
results, these files also contain results for expressing the composition of
diagonal unitaries in terms of their diagonals, and of permutation matrices in terms of the permutations they represent.

There's also a messy file with results on complex numbers on the unit circle as objects of type `unitary ℂ` -- an approach which may or may not be a good idea.

* `QCLib/Circuit/Gate/Qubit.lean`

Chaotic file with lots of minor results on single qubit gates. Incorporates significant material from "Lean-QuantumInfo".

* `QCLib/Circuit/Gate/Qubit/Bipartite.lean`

Permutations and controlled gates. Not restricted to qubits.

* `QCLib/Circuit/Gate/Qubit/Embed.lean`

The embedding of single-party and bipartite unitaries into the unitary group on
a tensor product. Most results are dependently-typed (i.e. working for inhomogeneous factors).

* `QCLib/Circuit/Gate/Qubit/PauliGroup`

Some basic results on the `n`-qubit Pauli group.

* `QCLib/Circuit/Gate/Qubit/QFT.lean`

A first implementation of a QFT circuit. [This is still quite messy. Cleanup is ongoing.]

* `QCLib/Circuit/Gate/Qubit/CZ.lean`

Work towards the "diagonal real Clifford group", i.e. the group generated by `Z` and controlled-`Z` gates. Goal is to reason about graph states. Incomplete.

* `QCLib/Circuit/Gate/Qubit/Complexity.lean`

Experiment for defining the gate complexity of a unitary. (Other projects seem to have much more sophisticated frameworks for talking about the syntax of quantum circuits / algorithms. So this might be a dead end).

* `QCLib/Tactic/MatrixExpand.lean`

The `matrix_expand` tactic is a slight variation of the one found in
"Lean-QuantumInfo". The file also contains logic for producing simpler goals
when using the `fin_cases` tactic on tuples (with contributions by Andrés
Goens).

* `QCLib/Tactic/AssocRw.lean`

A port of Lean3's `AssocRw` tactic. It's working, but an improved version better
adapted to Lean4 is being developed. Written by Georgios Afentakis.

* `ExperimentsAndDeadEnds`

Material that isn't working yet or not anymore. Experiments that didn't pan out.

* `ExperimentsAndDeadEnds/MatrixLike.lean`

Experiments for a `MatrixLike` typeclass to avoid code duplication when working
with types that bundle a matrix with additional information (unitarity /
hermiticity / invertibility). Incomplete, but should be discussed.

* `ExperimentsAndDeadEnds/Braket`

Braket formalism based on interpreting a ket `∣ψ⟩` as a linear map that sends 
`s : ℂ` to `s • ψ`. Including a version for continuous linear maps. Incomplete.

* `ExperimentsAndDeadEnds/PiTensorProduct`

Hilbert space instances on the `PiTensorProduct` of Hilbert spaces. Approach abandoned in favor of concrete vectors / matrices.

* `UnitTests`

Some tests.

# Contributors

Main authors:

Davood Haji Taghi Tehrani [Paradoxy (Zulipchat)](https://leanprover.zulipchat.com/#user/900949)
David Gross <david.gross@thp.uni-koeln.de>


Contributors:

Georgios Afentakis <gafentak@smail.uni-koeln.de>
Andrés Goens <andres.goens@tu-darmstadt.de>


## License

Copyright (c) 2026 David Gross, Davood Tehrani. All rights reserved.
Released under Apache 2.0 license as described in the file LICENSE.


# Attributions

The files `QCLib/Circuit/Gate/Qubit.lean` and `QCLib/Tactic/MatrixExpand.lean`
contain material from the Lean QuantumInfo repository https://github.com/Timeroot/Lean-QuantumInfo. 

Copyright (c) 2025 Alex Meiburg.

These parts are licensed under the MIT License:

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the “Software”), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED “AS IS”, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
